[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Have you noticed, whenever
you see a commercial for ham
on TV, it's often set in the
countryside with a nice family
and a rustic backdrop.
And the ham is always pink,
very pink, and 100% natural,
of course.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> It looks so tasty, it
has your mouth watering
on the couch.
Well, that's the point.
But what if behind this pretty
pink hid one of the biggest
health scandals of our era?
In 2015, the World
Health Organization
listed processed meats
as carcinogenic for man.
We decided to investigate
the ingredients used
by the giants of
the food industry.
>> It can induce DNA breaks,
mutate cells into sort
of pre-cancer cells.
>> We discovered that to impede
or halt regulations on certain
additives, food industry
lobbies have been working
in the shadows for decades.
>> You have to understand that
the industry is a money-making
business, so they're
very risk averse.
They're not going
to fund a study that
is bad for their business.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> At the heart of this strategy
of influence are the scientists
who collaborate--
>> Did the meat industry
pay you for this?
>> I received some
compensation for my time,
as well as the others.
>> How much?
>> I am not going to say.
>> --and the scientists
who are targeted.
>> Basically they're trying to
shoot me down or discredit me.
I mean, that's what shoot
down means, scientifically.
[BEEPING]
>> These efforts to go after
the scientists and to discredit
the scientists is a key element
of a much larger strategy
to just gum up the entire
policymaking process.
>> Between intimidation,
lies, and manipulation,
we will uncover proof of
a worldwide strategy where
hitting below the
belt is allowed.
>> Leave now.
Get the fuck out of here.
[DOOR SLAMS]
>> Feeling hungry now?
Then it's time to eat.
Tonight, you are our guest.
To find out how ham is
made, we visited a factory.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
[BEEPING]
Welcome to Fleury Michon, one
of the market leaders in France
and one of the few to play
the card of transparency.
[APPLAUSE]
The ham on your
supermarket shelves
starts out like this,
big lumps of pork meat.
To add taste, a little
vegetable stock.
It all goes into a ham-shaped
mold, and it's cooked.
And the result, perfectly
pink, rounded slices.
Have you grasped the basics?
Well, let's rewind a little
to see the detail that
changes everything.
To obtain this fine ham, there's
another very important step.
You have to inject the meat.
A machine with a dozen
syringes injects a liquid
into the lumps of pork meat.
The liquid contains
an essential additive.
Factory manager Laurent
Rouleau shows us.
These yellow sacks contain
a mixture of salt and sodium
nitrite, the additive E250.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> In fact, he's telling us
that the pretty pink of our ham
isn't natural at all.
It's thanks to sodium nitrite.
This additive fixes the pink
of the meat during cooking.
Otherwise, ham would be
the color of roast pork.
That's why food
industrialists can't
do without it, as a processed
meats producer would confirm.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
Let's sum up.
The ham's pink is unnatural,
but without the pink
it would be impossible to sell.
[BEEPING]
The big problem is
that sodium nitrite
is believed to be a
danger to public health.
The additive is suspected
of playing a role
in the development of colorectal
cancer, one of the deadliest
cancers in Europe.
The cause, a phenomenon that
takes place during digestion.
It's chemistry, but
we'll make it simple.
You swallow a piece
of cured meat.
You think you're
peacefully digesting it,
but what you don't
know is the nitrite
molecules are reacting
with the meat proteins,
transforming them into
very dangerous substances,
nitrosamines.
We went to the
Netherlands to learn more
about the effects of
this chemical reaction
on our health, to the
faculty of medicine
of Maastricht University.
This is where the toxicologist
professor Théo de Kok works.
He's been interested
in nitrites for years
and by extension, nitrosamines.
>> Nitrosamines are known to
induce damage in the large
intestine.
So it can induce DNA
breaks, mutate cells
into sort of pre-cancer cells.
And that's, of course, something
that you want to prevent.
>> Professor de Kok notably
wanted to find out what happens
inside the body when we don't
eat processed meat and when we
eat a lot of it.
To do so, he conducted
an experiment
with human guinea
pigs, like Arnaud.
For two weeks, this
student ate 300 grams
of processed meat a day, the
equivalent of eight and 1/2
sausages or seven slices of ham.
>> After 15 days, we saw that
the exposure to nitrosamines
was considerably increased,
so it was up to between two
and three-fold increase, as
compared to the levels that we
measured at the start.
>> The researcher measured the
impact on the organism of this
chemical mutation of
nitrites into nitrosamines.
In his lab, he tested the fecal
water of big processed meat
eaters like Arnaud.
>> So what you see here is
fecal water from four different
individuals.
>> To see what happens
inside the body,
the researchers mixed this
fecal water with human cells,
the white deposit
in the test tube.
Then they observed what
happened to the cells.
>> So you see that if
you have no exposure,
you see that
everything is intact.
So the material stays together.
But if you are exposed
to nitrosamines
that induce
breakages of the DNA,
you see this comet
tail appearing.
So you see that here, the
damage is quite extensive.
So the more damage you
have, the more likely
it is that a cell like
this will eventually mutate
into a pre-cancer type of cell.
>> How long does it
take for such a damage?
>> Well, this damage can be
induced relatively quickly.
So in this assay, when
we isolate the cells--
and we only expose
them for half an hour--
and then you already see the
breakage of these DNA strands.
That's how fast it can happen.
And it can also happen not
just in the lab here, but also
in an intact human body.
>> And if we stop using
nitrites, then what?
>> That would make a difference
of potentially several
thousands of colorectal cancer
that's in Europe every year.
>> That's huge?
>> That's huge.
Because colorectal cancer
is a very frequent disease.
Already small changes
in cancer risk
can have a big impact
in the large population.
>> Thousands fewer cancers and
therefore potentially fewer
deaths just by
suppressing nitrites.
But the food industry has
a sledgehammer argument
for justifying the
use of nitrites.
It protects us from botulism.
Botulism is a form of
food poisoning caused
by bacteria that affect
our central nervous system
and can be deadly.
Scary, right?
But there's a glitch
in their argument.
There are already
companies which
do produce processed
meats without nitrites,
and their customers
are in fine form.
If you happen to be in
Copenhagen in Denmark,
just after the Little Mermaid
and the quayside promenade,
pop into a supermarket
like we did.
There, you'll find cured
meats without nitrites.
And for those whose Danish
has gone a bit rusty,
it's uden nitrit.
It's everywhere.
You can easily recognize
it by its color,
more brownish than pretty pink.
And the best known brand is
produced 150 kilometers south
of the capital in Denmark's
biggest organic processed meat
plant, Hanegal.
>> [SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>> The boss, a biochemist,
started in nitrite-free cured
meats 25 years ago.
Since then, the Danish
health authorities
haven't registered a
single case of botulism
caused by processed meat.
>> We do not have problems
with this bacteria.
I would say for
the last 50 years,
this has not been a reasonable
topic in Western Europe.
That was a problem in meat
industry 100 years ago,
where things were not
as clean as they are.
Slaughterhouses were not
as clean as they are today.
So no worry about bacteria.
Now we have to worry
about additives
that might be cancer producing.
And if they are not necessary
for some very good reasons,
we should not use them.
>> For you, the cancer risk
today is the main risk.
>> That's the main
risk today, definitely.
And actually, it has
been so for 30, 40 years.
>> Why do producers still
put nitrites in meat?
>> The main reason is that they
are afraid that customers will
not accept products which do
not have the red color that they
have been used to
for many, many years.
>> Hanegal is one of the few
food industry companies to do
without nitrites.
And yet, experts have been
ringing alarm bells for years.
25 years ago, a European
Union health report already
recommended reducing
the amounts of nitrite
used in processed meats.
In 1999, this report even
put forward banning its use
altogether.
Despite the increasing
number of studies,
the European
Commission still allows
industrial food companies
to add lots of nitrites
to the products.
So we went to ask
the commissioner
for health and food safety,
a former health minister
in Lithuania, a few questions.
>> Why don't get
the levels lower?
>> I would like to guarantee
you that it is, of course,
in the hands of institutions,
which are responsible
to follow, to say, and to
present to us final results.
And those always takes
time and responsibility.
>> For over an hour, the
commissioner attempted to pull
the wool over our eyes in spite
of all the reports by experts,
which for 25 years have
warned the authorities about
the dangers of nitrites.
>> All these studies, you
don't think they're enough?
>> All those studies are open.
And you see why thanks
to transparency, thanks
to possibility to have them,
to show to people that we
are ready to follow,
and to see, and to do,
how to move as soon as possible.
>> Transparency is good,
but decisions are better.
>> All decisions are
in line of procedures.
Can you imagine like
that decision to make?
If I will be king of
the European Union, oh.
But I am not king
of European Union.
>> I mean, this story has
been going on for so long.
>> No, no, no.
Sorry to say.
>> It's very [INAUDIBLE].
>> This study shows that all
standards are in safety line.
>> In this case, why Europe lost
against Denmark in the European
Court of Justice in
this nitrite story?
>> I don't know.
I can't answer this.
I would like to get
more information,
because I am not one
who knows everything.
>> So let's look at the
facts, Mr. Commissioner.
Denmark wanted to limit
the use of nitrites.
The European Commission
was against it.
And in 2003 in
court, the Danes won
in the name of the
protection of public health.
>> I am very happy about
European court decisions.
Then European court
decision always shows
that public health is priority.
It means that DG Sante
and the commissioner
responsible for public health
is in better conditions.
>> And yet, since
this court ruling,
EU regulations are
just as lax as ever.
>> From my point of view,
we must be more energetic,
asking industry to change the
technology that formulates
food, to follow figures to
keep on board public health
priorities, not
profit, absolutely.
But, of course, it takes time.
>> Time, perfect.
That's just what the
food industry wants
and what it has built its
strategy on for years.
Because when it
comes to nitrites,
industrialists have been waiting
out the clock for 40 years,
40 years of scientific
manipulation, blackmail,
and intense lobbying
so the meat business
can carry on bringing
home the bacon.
And it all began on the
other side of the Atlantic.
If you think we're
exaggerating, listen to this.
In the late 1970s,
nitrite was almost
banned in the United States
just after the publication
of a large-scale study
requested by the government.
>> A relationship between
cancer and nitrite was proved,
suggested.
>> No, proved, and
a fairly strong one.
There were 2,000 rats
involved in this study.
It's a very extensive study done
by a well-respected scientist.
>> The banning of nitrites
was announced in the press,
but the American Meat Institute
would bring out its big guns.
In his office
overlooking the capital,
its president, Richard
Lyng, spoke out.
>> Processed meats that contain
nitrites are a big thing.
The retail value of them,
about $12.5 billion.
About 2/3 of the hog
production in the United States
goes into cured meats.
And it presents a
problem for our industry
and for the government.
We're hopeful that a
solution can be found.
>> Armed with
financial analysis,
the American meat lobby forced
the government to back down.
The banning of nitrites would
send pork prices plummeting
and cause an apocalypse.
But it was a political event
that would close the debate.
In 1980, Ronald
Reagan was elected
president of the United States.
And guess who entered
into government?
Richard Lyng, the president
of the American Meat Institute
himself.
The idea of banning
nitrite was forever buried.
[MECHANICAL CREAKING]
The experiment-based study
on 2,000 rats ended up
in the trash can.
And after that,
the same fate would
await every
scientific publication
calling nitrites into question.
[BOINGING]
If you're wondering how
the interests of industry
can systematically
win against what's
at stake in public health, the
following will enlighten you.
15 years after the victory
of Reagan and the meat
industrialists, a new study
shook America to the core.
>> If it's not one
thing, it's another.
A study finds a link between
hot dogs now and cancer.
>> Put yourself in the shoes
of the average American Joe
at the time.
You and your family are eating
hot dogs at the shopping mall
or in the street just as usual.
The effect was immediate.
In a matter of days, hot
dog sales fell by 8%.
And given the size of
the American market,
that represented
millions of dollars
less for the food industry.
The author of the hot dog study
that caused sales to plummet
was Susan Preston-Martin.
She's now a retired
scientist living
near Los Angeles in a
residential, suburban setting
straight out of
an American soap.
After several tense months of
talks, she agreed to see us.
But we had to insist right
up until the last minute.
The lady is very discreet.
>> It's Sandrine
Rigaud from French TV.
>> I don't know what you said.
>> Mrs. Preston-Martin?
>> Yes?
>> Yes.
I'm Sandrine Rigaud
from French TV.
>> Oh, gosh.
>> Hello.
>> No.
>> With her discoveries
on processed meats,
the researcher was the victim
of a number of attacks.
But she agreed to look
back at her work, which
showed a link between
the excessive eating
of hot dogs and certain
rare cancers in children.
>> How did you find
the relationship?
>> Well, just the way we always
did when we did case control
studies.
We started out with
a group of children
who had leukemia
and compared them
to a group of children
who didn't have leukemia.
And we asked the mothers about
what they fed the children.
And sure enough, the kids with
leukemia ate more hot dogs.
>> What did you think when you
saw this strong relationship?
Because it was quite
a strong relationship.
>> It was with hot dogs.
I was a little bit
surprised and just reserved
judgment, which is
what epidemiologists
do when they find something
they don't expect.
>> From that moment on for
the food industrialists,
Susan Preston-Martin became
public enemy number one.
>> The meat lobby, they
definitely didn't like what we
were doing.
They were terribly upset,
and I could understand that.
Their livelihood was
making processed meats.
And they didn't want
anything coming out
saying that those
were not good for you.
Basically were trying to
shoot me down or discredit me.
I mean, that's what shoot
down means, scientifically.
>> What we discovered
went much farther.
The scientists had
never realized just
whom she was dealing with.
>> America made
the hot dog famous.
Oscar Mayer gave it diggity.
>> (SINGING) Hot diggity, dog
ziggity, boom, what you do--
>> In the US, the undisputed
champion of supermarket-sold
hot dogs has always
been Oscar Mayer--
>> America's number one.
>> (SINGING) Hot diggity dog.
>> --a brand of the
Kraft Foods group,
a giant of the food industry.
So far, no surprises.
But what's less known is that
at the time and until 2007,
Kraft was owned by Philip
Morris, the world's
second largest tobacco
company, a lobby which
went as far as lies
and manipulation
to defend its own interests,
notably in the big tobacco
lawsuits of the 1990s--
>> Do you believe
nicotine is not addictive?
>> I believe nicotine
is not addictive, yes.
is not addictive.
>> Nicotine is not addictive.
>> --questioning proven
scientific facts.
The strategy worked perfectly
for years with tobacco.
So Philip Morris used it again
to save Oscar Mayer's hot dogs.
To understand how the
multinational manipulated
science to defend its
investments in cured meats,
we headed to northern
California, to San Francisco.
This university library
holds what are commonly
known as the Tobacco Documents,
millions of internal tobacco
industry documents.
Our guide, Stanton
Glantz, has spent his life
unraveling the cigarette
makers' strategies.
>> Carton four.
>> He particularly remembers
one phrase used by a lobbyist
in 1969.
>> "Doubt is our product
since it is the best means
of competing with the body of
fact that exists in the mind
of the general public.
It is also the means of
establishing a controversy."
>> For him, everything is
summed up in one word, doubt.
And it was exactly like
that, by creating doubt,
that Philip Morris set out to
discredit Dr. Preston-Martin's
study on processed meat
and cancer in children.
The proof is there
in the vast database
of the Tobacco Documents.
By typing Susan Preston-Martin,
you get hundreds of hits
and all in the
Philip Morris file.
The researcher's name
crops up regularly
in the titles of memos,
letters, and internal reports.
The multinational believed
her study on hot dogs
would reopen the debate
surrounding nitrites
from the 1970s.
So it paid scientists
to go through her work
with a fine tooth comb in
order to find any weak points.
Even her contracts
and grant papers
passed under the microscope,
basically anything that
could be used against
her and weaken her
in the eyes of the
government and the press.
Stanton Glantz only
learned of this case
through the documents
we showed him.
>> The approaches that they
used to attack the person doing
the research on linking
cured meats with cancer were
the standard things they do.
One is to go through her
work with a fine tooth comb
and find every little thing they
can possibly complain about.
And because the issues tend
to be fairly technical,
if you're a politician,
if you're a reporter,
unless you're a highly
specialized reporter,
all you hear is,
well, this person
said there was something
bad, and this other person
said they didn't know what
they were talking about.
And so these efforts to
go after the scientists
and to discredit the
scientists is a key element
of a much larger
strategy to just
gum up the entire policymaking
process to the point where
nothing happens.
That translates into hundreds
of billions of dollars
of sales and profits for them.
So the whole game
is just slow down.
>> In the documents
on Dr. Preston-Martin,
other even more Machiavellian
scenarios were studied.
Here, it was
suggested that talks
be held with the scientist,
and here, a proposed seminar
in order to lure her.
The aim, to influence
her and even
shape the conclusions
of her future studies.
The common point
of these documents,
they all come from the same
lobbying firm, Multinational
Business Services, Inc.,
already hired by Philip Morris
to contest the effects of
passive smoking on health
and headed by a certain Jim
Tozzi, a master of influence.
Amazingly, in Washington,
the heart of American power,
this lobbyist is still
well established.
As he never answered our
requests for an interview,
we went to see him without an
appointment with our documents
in hand and a hidden camera.
[DOORBELL RINGS]
>> Hi.
>> Hello.
I'm looking for a Mr. Jim Tozzi.
>> Yes, he works here.
Who are you with?
>> I'm a French journalist.
I'm working for France 2.
And I'm working on lobbying.
>> But do you have
an appointment?
>> No, no.
I was just looking for him
because I called from friends.
>> Just step inside, please.
>> Yes.
>> Because he's not here now.
>> The good news, American
lobbyists can be welcoming.
We even managed to have Jim
Tozzi on his cell phone.
>> Here, please.
Here, come on, right
in here, please.
Jim, can you hear me?
>> (ON PHONE) I
can hear you, yeah.
>> I wanted to ask you
some questions about Susan
Preston-Martin.
>> (ON PHONE) No, I
don't even know the lady.
How did you get my name?
I haven't read her
work or anything.
>> Because you have set up a
strategy to discredit her work
for Oscar Mayer.
So I wanted to know
more about this.
>> (ON PHONE) [INAUDIBLE]
>> What?
Excuse me?
I have no idea what
she's talking about.
>> (ON PHONE) Is
this the press lady?
Which newspaper is she--
>> I have no idea who you're
working for, so I'm going
to ask you to leave.
>> I can send you my email.
No, no.
I can send you my email.
>> No.
I'm going to have
to ask you to leave.
>> You have seen my passport.
I'm just asking
for an interview.
>> Look, I understand.
>> If you liked the
welcoming lobbyist,
you'll love the angry one.
>> I'm asking you-- you
have no appointment.
Now please leave, now.
Do I need to--
leave.
>> We can leave if we want?
>> Yes, please leave.
I am ordering you out.
>> OK.
>> Leave now.
Out.
Get the fuck out of here.
>> OK, OK, no problem.
>> Do you understand
get the fuck out?
Now get the flying fuck out
of here, and do not come back.
Thank you.
[DOOR SHUTS]
>> Pity it had to end like that.
In the end, Mr. Tozzi
did a great job, well,
at least for the industrialists.
Back then, his
anti-Preston-Martin arguments
were brought into the media
spotlight by this health
journalist on a major
national TV channel
a few days after the
publication of the famous study.
>> Let's get back to
our hot dog study.
Remember, they asked the
people, did you eat a hot dog?
They didn't ask them,
did you put it in a bun?
Did you put ketchup on it?
>> Ugh.
>> Did you put mustard on it?
Now you might be
saying, who really cares
one way or the other?
But that's important
because it may
be that it's not the hot
dog at all that's causing
this increased risk of cancer.
Maybe it's the bun.
Maybe it's the ketchup.
Maybe it's the mustard.
So you have to be careful when
you read these studies, not
to say, oh, this causes this.
>> The powers that be
didn't go any farther.
The 1970s nitrites file,
which could have resurfaced,
remained locked away.
You're probably wondering what
Susan Preston-Martin thinks,
the woman targeted by the lobby.
We showed her the documents,
and what upset her
the most was seeing that fellow
scientists had played along
with the industrialists.
>> These professors will
get paid a huge amount to do
a review by, in this case,
probably the American Meat
Institute--
I mean, thousands and
thousands of dollars.
And they probably get more
from doing this kind of thing
than they do from
their regular jobs.
>> Seeing your name like
this in all these documents--
>> My goodness, I gave a
lot of people a lot of work.
[LAUGHS]
>> Were you aware of this?
>> Well, I was aware that the
processed meat community was
concerned, but not aware
of all the extent of this.
>> 20 years on and she
had turned the page.
>> Not of interest anymore.
That's how the public awareness
of science goes, of interest,
and then it's not of interest.
>> So you mean you did
all that work, but today--
>> But it doesn't matter.
I mean, it's still
in the literature.
And it may influence
people in the future,
and it has influenced
people in the past.
And that's fine.
>> But another scientist
involved in the case has
enjoyed a much more
flourishing career,
a scientist paid by the American
Meat Institute to shoot down
Susan Preston-Martin's work--
David Klurfeld.
Today, David Klurfeld is head
of the US government's nutrition
program.
And he's invited
all over the world
for scientific
conferences, where
he gives his expert's point of
view, totally independently.
>> I'd like to introduce the
reasons why I think meat is
an important component
of a healthy diet.
Spend just a very brief
amount of time on that.
>> On that day,
he was in France,
speaking to scientists from
around the world about meat
and the link between processed
meat and cancer in order
to denounce, backed
up by PowerPoint,
the climate of fear,
panic, and even hysteria.
And we know, because
we were there.
It was right at the start
of our investigation
when we barely
knew about nitrites
and had the need of enlightened
specialists to help us.
>> So there are new reviews
published this year that say
nitrite is not harmful and
others that say it is harmful.
I don't think anybody really
knows definitively what
the answer is.
>> A few months
after this handshake,
when we had learned more
about the industry of doubt,
bells started ringing.
So we took advantage
of our trip to America
to ask him for another
interview, only
this time with a lot
more cards up our sleeve.
>> Do you remember being paid
by the American Meat Institute?
>> No.
>> Never?
>> I was interested in
a scientist called Susan
Preston-Martin.
>> Yes.
>> Do you know her?
>> I know who she is.
I do not know her personally.
>> Do you remember
writing a paper on her--
>> Yes.
>> --for the American
Meat Institute?
>> No.
I found this.
And it was prepared for the
American Meat Institute.
>> [SIGHS]
OK.
This is something
different, yes.
This was done 20
years ago, roughly.
So I had forgotten about that.
>> Do you remember how much you
were paid for this evaluation?
>> No, I do not.
As I said, it was
20 or 25 years ago.
>> You didn't know when you were
working for the American Meat
Institute that Philip Morris
was owning Oscar Mayer?
>> [SIGHS]
I'm not going to say yes
or no at this point in time
because it's more
than 20 years ago.
>> Did you know that the
tobacco strategy motto was,
"Doubt is our product?"
>> No, I never heard that.
>> No?
>> No.
>> Doubt was your product too.
>> That was not my--
that was not my intent.
My intent was to
do an evaluation.
If I had read these papers
and found that there were not
shortcomings in the papers,
that there were not deficiencies
in the papers, I don't think
I would have criticized them.
>> But don't you think that your
point of view would be stronger
and your argument stronger if I
hadn't found that you had been
once paid by the
American Meat Institute?
>> No.
I don't think that
would change--
it wouldn't change
my point of view.
It might change
your point of view
that you tend to
not believe what
I'm saying because 25 years
ago I got some amount of money
that I don't remember.
>> Ah, we're making progress.
He can't remember how much, but
he does remember getting paid.
>> But you have to understand
that the industry is
a moneymaking business, so
they're very risk averse.
They would not fund a study
that someone proposed to them
that eating hot dogs increases
the risk of childhood cancer.
Why would they fund that?
They would only
fund something that
proposes that
childhood cancer is
prevented by eating
more hot dogs
or there's no relationship.
They're not going
to fund a study that
is bad for their business.
>> Well, at least he's honest.
Much of the meat
industry's lobbying
depends on collaboration
with paid scientists,
and that's still
how things work.
During a conference on processed
meats and cancer in Lyon,
a French scientist confirmed it.
Denis Corpet is a
reference on the subject,
an internationally-renowned
expert.
He speaks and acts
casually, and doesn't
balk at telling us how things
work at scientific events.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> A few days later, Professor
Corpet sent us some names
and photos of scientists
he suspects of being close
to the food industry.
Among them, two Americans he
came across at a conference
on meat and cancer, Andrew
Milkowski and Nathan Bryan.
As we checked out these
scientists' profiles,
we discovered a document
which should certainly never
have been on the web, an
internal report issued
by the American Meat Institute.
It lays out the strategy for
influencing the decisions
of high profile organizations.
This organization is the
IARC, the International Agency
for Research on Cancer.
This institution,
based in Lyon, France,
is the worldwide
reference on cancer.
In 2006, IARC scientists
classified nitrites
in the probably carcinogenic
category of products, group 2A.
And that was bad for business.
So lobbyists are
fighting to have
this classification changed.
Page 64 of the document, "Change
in the IARC nitrite/nitrate
classification from 2A to
2B," or possibly carcinogenic
products.
The strategy has a
name, IARC Challenge.
It notably involves
the two scientists
we were interested in, Andrew
Milkowski and Nathan Bryan.
Armed with our
brand new file, it
was time to set off to meet
the meat sector's heavyweights.
Welcome to Nashville, Tennessee,
the capital of country music
and notably the
hometown of Johnny Cash.
It's here that the
American Meat Institute
is holding its
annual conference,
in this huge building,
to be precise.
The meat industry in the US
is very, very big business.
All of the world's
biggest players are here--
Smithfield, number one in pork,
with a turnover of $14 billion
a year, Cargill, the giant
with $33 billion a year
in food alone, and Tyson, the
all-divisions record holder.
>> This year, we'll make, with
all of our divisions between
beef, pork, poultry,
and prepared,
between $37 billion and
$40 billion in revenue.
>> It's a small company?
>> Very small company, un peu.
[LAUGHS]
>> We checked.
It's over $41 billion.
After half an hour, we
spot a face in the crowd
that rings a bell,
that woman there,
tasting nibbles at every stand.
That's right, page 92 of
the IARC Challenge document,
here with the short hair,
the American Meat Institute's
senior vice president of
public affairs, Janet Riley.
>> Excuse me, please.
Sorry.
Hello.
>> Yes?
>> Are you Janet Riley?
>> I am.
>> Yes, hello.
I'm Sandrine Rigaud.
I'm working for France 2 on
processed meat and cancer,
and I have a question
about a document I found.
It is this document.
Do you know it?
>> I'm sorry.
Who are you with?
>> I'm working for France 2.
>> OK.
And I don't see you
registered here.
>> No, no.
Actually, I wasn't
registered, but I
have some important questions.
>> OK.
Could you give me
your business card?
>> Yes, of course.
I have my journalist card.
>> Let's step outside.
>> Just a question.
I wanted to know, what do you
know about the IARC Challenge?
>> You know what, I--
>> The IARC Challenge here.
>> Can you turn off the camera
until I know what I'm doing?
>> But it's about
nitrite and cancer.
>> Can I have this?
Thank you.
>> No, no.
This is mine, sorry.
And I wanted to know--
>> OK, so much
for our interview.
>> He's also not registered.
>> Why?
Is he with you?
>> No.
>> Why are you recording?
>> Having been
escorted outside--
>> This is my press card.
>> OK.
>> --and been ordered to show
ID, we try one last time.
>> It's France 2.
It looks like what tobacco
industry did for decades.
>> That's your opinion.
That's your opinion.
What we're doing is providing
science-based, peer-reviewed
evidence that our
products are safe.
And that's all I'm
going to say right now.
>> But are you paying
those scientists--
>> And you know what?
I know you've got that
camera rolling, don't you?
>> Luckily, for such cases,
we always have a plan B.
On the list of IARC
Challenge scientists,
there was one who agreed to
see us, the first on the list,
Andrew Milkowski.
We head to Madison, Wisconsin.
This city in the north
of the United States
is home to Andrew Milkowski
and the company of hot dog
king, Oscar Mayer,
who we came across
in the Preston-Martin case.
>> America's number one.
>> The scientist worked for
this company for 30 years.
He now teaches at
the university,
but he doesn't hide his
proximity to the American Meat
Lobby.
Presented with our IARC
Challenge documents,
he acknowledges
everything, or almost.
>> So did the meat
industry pay you for this?
>> I received some
compensation for my time,
as well as the others.
>> How much?
>> I am not going to say.
>> I don't know, thousands or
tens of thousands of dollars?
>> Small amounts.
>> Small amounts?
Can we have an idea?
>> No.
>> No?
Defending nitrites seems to be
a very big thing for industry.
>> Looking for substitutes
has been attempted,
and was a total failure.
Something as chemically simple
as nitrite and as unique
as nitrite, having a substitute
has not been possible
to anyone's ability.
>> But if there is a small
risk of getting cancer,
don't you think it's important
to try to find a solution?
>> That is where we disagree,
because I do not believe that
that risk is true.
>> You think there
is no risk at all?
>> I think the risk is
unquantifiable and unknown,
if it indeed exists.
>> On hearing that, we
pulled this expression.
So for Andrew Milkowski,
the colorectal cancer,
the hundreds of studies on the
dangers of nitrites, none of it
exists.
Off you go, nothing
to do with it.
In the United
States, it's thanks
to scientists like Milkowski
that the meat industry
has been able to cut
another notch in its belt,
surprisingly in the health
conscious state of California.
This imposing building
is home to the state
cabinet-level California
Environmental Protection
Agency.
We have an appointment
with Sam Delson,
deputy director for external
and legislative affairs.
He'll show us a document
that doesn't exist
in any other American state.
>> Hello, Michelle.
Long time no see.
>> Hi, Sam.
>> Hello.
Sandrine.
So this is the list?
>> Yes.
>> It's a list of substances
judged dangerous to man
by the state of California.
To do business
here, manufacturers
are banned from using
these substances,
or they are obliged
to warn consumers.
And it's very restrictive
because there are
over 800 products on the list.
>> So a good example of
that would be tobacco smoke.
They talk about lead.
There's other
things like benzene.
That would be something we have
common in things like exhaust.
And then here, we have aspirin.
>> You have aspirin?
>> Aspirin, yeah.
It's a special note,
especially for pregnant women.
Oh, here's an odd one, but
things like bracken fern.
If you want to eat
this, go for it,
but be aware that
you maybe don't want
to eat it every single day.
>> So we don't find nitrite?
>> Nitrite is not on the list.
>> It's been years since
nitrites have been targeted,
but procedures have
never been seen through.
>> When we believe a chemical
meets the criteria for listing,
we post what's known as a
notice of intent to list.
And that triggers
a period in which
people can submit public
comments on whether it does
or does not meet the criteria.
We review the comments before
making a final decision
to complete the listing.
>> Regarding nitrites, here
are the comments that swung
the scales.
Of the seven
contributions, six come
from food industry lobbyists.
And with 31 pages, the
winner is Andrew Milkowski.
Before the interview, we show
Sam Delson all our documents
on Milkowski, the
IARC Challenge,
and the attempts at influence.
Faced with an avalanche of
proof gathered during months
of investigation, he ends
up taking out his cell phone
to take photos.
However, in answering
our questions
he seems less inspired.
>> We-- it's their business
if they think that they can
influence a decision
beyond the science,
but we let the science
do the talking.
>> Do you think it might
happen that sometimes you are
manipulated by the industries?
>> We do our best to make
decisions based solely
on the science, regardless of
whatever pressure or attempts
at persuasion may be made
by any outside group.
>> OK.
>> California will re-examine
the dangers of nitrites,
but not before next year.
For the lobby, it's a
mini-victory, time gained
and profits not lost.
In Europe, a new
study on nitrite
was expected in December 2015.
Almost a year later, it
still has not been published.
[MUSIC PLAYING]